# This -*- conf -*- file was generated by './etc/teams.scm codeowners'.
#
# It describes the expected reviewers for a pull request based on the
# changed files.  Unlike what the name of the file suggests they don't
# own the code (ownership is collective in this house!) but merely have
# a good understanding of that area of the codebase and therefore are
# usually suited as a reviewer.

gnu/packages/machine-learning\.scm                 @guix/ai

gnu/packages/audio\.scm                            @guix/audio
gnu/packages/fluidplug\.scm                        @guix/audio
gnu/packages/xiph\.scm                             @guix/audio

gnu/packages/commencement\.scm                     @guix/bootstrap
gnu/packages/mes\.scm                              @guix/bootstrap

gnu/build-system/cmake\.scm                        @guix/cpp
gnu/build/cmake-build-system\.scm                  @guix/cpp
gnu/packages/c\.scm                                @guix/cpp
gnu/packages/cmake\.scm                            @guix/cpp
gnu/packages/cpp\.scm                              @guix/cpp
gnu/packages/ninja\.scm                            @guix/cpp
gnu/packages/valgrind\.scm                         @guix/cpp

guix/avahi\.scm                                    @guix/core
guix/base16\.scm                                   @guix/core
guix/base32\.scm                                   @guix/core
guix/base64\.scm                                   @guix/core
guix/bzr-download\.scm                             @guix/core
guix/cache\.scm                                    @guix/core
guix/channels\.scm                                 @guix/core
guix/ci\.scm                                       @guix/core
guix/colors\.scm                                   @guix/core
guix/combinators\.scm                              @guix/core
guix/config\.scm                                   @guix/core
guix/cpio\.scm                                     @guix/core
guix/cpu\.scm                                      @guix/core
guix/cve\.scm                                      @guix/core
guix/cvs-download\.scm                             @guix/core
guix/deprecation\.scm                              @guix/core
guix/derivations\.scm                              @guix/core
guix/describe\.scm                                 @guix/core
guix/diagnostics\.scm                              @guix/core
guix/discovery\.scm                                @guix/core
guix/docker\.scm                                   @guix/core
guix/download\.scm                                 @guix/core
guix/elf\.scm                                      @guix/core
guix/ftp-client\.scm                               @guix/core
guix/gexp\.scm                                     @guix/core
guix/git-authenticate\.scm                         @guix/core
guix/git-download\.scm                             @guix/core
guix/git\.scm                                      @guix/core
guix/glob\.scm                                     @guix/core
guix/gnu-maintenance\.scm                          @guix/core
guix/gnupg\.scm                                    @guix/core
guix/grafts\.scm                                   @guix/core
guix/graph\.scm                                    @guix/core
guix/hash\.scm                                     @guix/core
guix/hg-download\.scm                              @guix/core
guix/http-client\.scm                              @guix/core
guix/i18n\.scm                                     @guix/core
guix/inferior\.scm                                 @guix/core
guix/ipfs\.scm                                     @guix/core
guix/least-authority\.scm                          @guix/core
guix/licenses\.scm                                 @guix/core
guix/lint\.scm                                     @guix/core
guix/man-db\.scm                                   @guix/core
guix/memoization\.scm                              @guix/core
guix/modules\.scm                                  @guix/core
guix/monad-repl\.scm                               @guix/core
guix/monads\.scm                                   @guix/core
guix/narinfo\.scm                                  @guix/core
guix/nar\.scm                                      @guix/core
guix/openpgp\.scm                                  @guix/core
guix/packages\.scm                                 @guix/core
guix/pki\.scm                                      @guix/core
guix/platform\.scm                                 @guix/core
guix/profiles\.scm                                 @guix/core
guix/profiling\.scm                                @guix/core
guix/progress\.scm                                 @guix/core
guix/quirks\.scm                                   @guix/core
guix/read-print\.scm                               @guix/core
guix/records\.scm                                  @guix/core
guix/remote\.scm                                   @guix/core
guix/repl\.scm                                     @guix/core
guix/search-paths\.scm                             @guix/core
guix/self\.scm                                     @guix/core
guix/serialization\.scm                            @guix/core
guix/sets\.scm                                     @guix/core
guix/ssh\.scm                                      @guix/core
guix/status\.scm                                   @guix/core
guix/store\.scm                                    @guix/core
guix/substitutes\.scm                              @guix/core
guix/svn-download\.scm                             @guix/core
guix/swh\.scm                                      @guix/core
guix/tests\.scm                                    @guix/core
guix/transformations\.scm                          @guix/core
guix/ui\.scm                                       @guix/core
guix/upstream\.scm                                 @guix/core
guix/utils\.scm                                    @guix/core
guix/workers\.scm                                  @guix/core
guix/platforms/                                    @guix/core
guix/scripts/                                      @guix/core
guix/store/                                        @guix/core
nix/                                               @guix/core

gnu/packages/base\.scm                             @guix/core-packages
gnu/packages/bootstrap\.scm                        @guix/core-packages
gnu/packages/commencement\.scm                     @guix/core-packages
gnu/packages/cross-base\.scm                       @guix/core-packages
gnu/packages/gcc\.scm                              @guix/core-packages
gnu/packages/guile\.scm                            @guix/core-packages
gnu/packages/ld-wrapper\.in                        @guix/core-packages
gnu/packages/make-bootstrap\.scm                   @guix/core-packages
gnu/packages/multiprecision\.scm                   @guix/core-packages
guix/build/gnu-build-system\.scm                   @guix/core-packages
guix/build/utils\.scm                              @guix/core-packages
guix/build-system/gnu\.scm                         @guix/core-packages

gnu/packages/debian\.scm                           @guix/debian

\.texi$                                            @guix/documentation
doc/build\.scm                                     @guix/documentation
gnu/system/examples/bare-bones\.tmpl               @guix/documentation
gnu/system/examples/lightweight-desktop\.tmpl      @guix/documentation
gnu/system/examples/desktop\.tmpl                  @guix/documentation

gnu/packages/electronics\.scm                      @guix/electronics
gnu/packages/libftdi\.scm                          @guix/electronics
gnu/packages/engineering\.scm                      @guix/electronics
gnu/packages/flashing-tools\.scm                   @guix/electronics

gnu/packages/aux-files/emacs/guix-emacs\.el        @guix/emacs
gnu/packages/aux-files/emacs/comp-integrity\.el    @guix/emacs
gnu/packages/emacs(-.+|)\.scm$                     @guix/emacs
gnu/packages/tree-sitter\.scm                      @guix/emacs
guix/build/emacs-build-system\.scm                 @guix/emacs
guix/build/emacs-utils\.scm                        @guix/emacs
guix/build-system/emacs\.scm                       @guix/emacs
guix/import/elpa\.scm                              @guix/emacs
guix/scripts/import/elpa\.scm                      @guix/emacs
tests/import/elpa\.scm                             @guix/emacs

gnu/packages/bootloaders\.scm                      @guix/embedded
gnu/packages/firmware\.scm                         @guix/embedded

gnu/packages/emulators\.scm                        @guix/games
gnu/packages/games\.scm                            @guix/games
gnu/packages/game-development\.scm                 @guix/games
gnu/packages/luanti\.scm                           @guix/games
gnu/packages/esolangs\.scm                         @guix/games
gnu/packages/motti\.scm                            @guix/games
guix/build/luanti-build-system\.scm                @guix/games

etc/teams/gnome                                    @guix/gnome
gnu/packages/glib\.scm                             @guix/gnome
gnu/packages/gstreamer\.scm                        @guix/gnome
gnu/packages/gtk\.scm                              @guix/gnome
gnu/packages/gnome\.scm                            @guix/gnome
gnu/packages/gnome-xyz\.scm                        @guix/gnome
gnu/packages/webkit\.scm                           @guix/gnome
gnu/services/desktop\.scm                          @guix/gnome
guix/build/glib-or-gtk-build-system\.scm           @guix/gnome
guix/build/meson-build-system\.scm                 @guix/gnome

gnu/packages/configuration-management\.scm         @guix/go
gnu/packages/golang(-.+|)\.scm$                    @guix/go
gnu/packages/syncthing\.scm                        @guix/go
gnu/packages/terraform\.scm                        @guix/go
guix/build-system/go\.scm                          @guix/go
guix/build/go-build-system\.scm                    @guix/go
guix/import/go\.scm                                @guix/go
guix/scripts/import/go\.scm                        @guix/go
tests/import/go\.scm                               @guix/go

gnu/packages/dhall\.scm                            @guix/haskell
gnu/packages/haskell(-.+|)\.scm$                   @guix/haskell
gnu/packages/purescript\.scm                       @guix/haskell
guix/build/haskell-build-system\.scm               @guix/haskell
guix/build-system/haskell\.scm                     @guix/haskell
guix/import/cabal\.scm                             @guix/haskell
guix/import/hackage\.scm                           @guix/haskell
guix/import/stackage\.scm                          @guix/haskell
guix/scripts/import/hackage\.scm                   @guix/haskell

(gnu|guix/scripts)/home(\.scm$|/)                  @guix/home
tests/guix-home\.sh                                @guix/home
tests/home-import\.scm                             @guix/home
tests/home-services\.scm                           @guix/home

gnu/packages/mpi\.scm                              @guix/hpc
gnu/packages/rocm\.scm                             @guix/hpc
gnu/packages/sycl\.scm                             @guix/hpc
gnu/packages/tbb\.scm                              @guix/hpc
gnu/packages/vulkan\.scm                           @guix/hpc

gnu/system/hurd\.scm                               @guix/hurd
gnu/system/images/hurd\.scm                        @guix/hurd
gnu/build/hurd-boot\.scm                           @guix/hurd
gnu/services/hurd\.scm                             @guix/hurd
gnu/packages/hurd\.scm                             @guix/hurd

gnu/installer(\.scm$|/)                            @guix/installer

gnu/packages/java(-.+|)\.scm$                      @guix/java
gnu/packages/maven(-.+|)\.scm$                     @guix/java
guix/build/ant-build-system\.scm                   @guix/java
guix/build/java-utils\.scm                         @guix/java
guix/build/maven-build-system\.scm                 @guix/java
guix/build/maven/                                  @guix/java
guix/build-system/ant\.scm                         @guix/java
guix/build-system/maven\.scm                       @guix/java

gnu/packages/node-xyz\.scm                         @guix/javascript
gnu/packages/node\.scm                             @guix/javascript
guix/build-system/node\.scm                        @guix/javascript
guix/build/node-build-system\.scm                  @guix/javascript
guix/import/npm-binary\.scm                        @guix/javascript
guix/scripts/import/npm-binary\.scm                @guix/javascript

gnu/packages/julia(-.+|)\.scm$                     @guix/julia
guix/build/julia-build-system\.scm                 @guix/julia
guix/build-system/julia\.scm                       @guix/julia

gnu/packages/(kde)(-.+|)\.scm$                     @guix/kde

gnu/build/linux-modules\.scm                       @guix/kernel
gnu/packages/aux-files/linux-libre.*$              @guix/kernel
gnu/packages/linux\.scm                            @guix/kernel
gnu/tests/linux-modules\.scm                       @guix/kernel
guix/build/linux-module-build-system\.scm          @guix/kernel
guix/build-system/linux-module\.scm                @guix/kernel

gnu/packages/lisp(-.+|)\.scm$                      @guix/lisp
guix/build/asdf-build-system\.scm                  @guix/lisp
guix/build/lisp-utils\.scm                         @guix/lisp
guix/build-system/asdf\.scm                        @guix/lisp

gnu/packages/anthy\.scm                            @guix/localization
gnu/packages/fcitx5\.scm                           @guix/localization
gnu/packages/fonts\.scm                            @guix/localization
gnu/packages/ibus\.scm                             @guix/localization

gnu/packages/lxqt\.scm                             @guix/lxqt


gnu/build/icecat-extension\.scm                    @guix/mozilla
gnu/packages/browser-extensions\.scm               @guix/mozilla
gnu/packages/gnuzilla\.scm                         @guix/mozilla
gnu/packages/librewolf\.scm                        @guix/mozilla
gnu/packages/tor-browsers\.scm                     @guix/mozilla

gnu/packages/ocaml\.scm                            @guix/ocaml
gnu/packages/coq\.scm                              @guix/ocaml
guix/build/ocaml-build-system\.scm                 @guix/ocaml
guix/build/dune-build-system\.scm                  @guix/ocaml
guix/build-system/ocaml\.scm                       @guix/ocaml
guix/build-system/dune\.scm                        @guix/ocaml
guix/import/opam\.scm                              @guix/ocaml
guix/scripts/import/opam\.scm                      @guix/ocaml
tests/import/opam\.scm                             @guix/ocaml

gnu/packages/django\.scm                           @guix/python
gnu/packages/jupyter\.scm                          @guix/python
gnu/packages/python(-.+|)\.scm$                    @guix/python
gnu/packages/sphinx\.scm                           @guix/python
gnu/packages/tryton\.scm                           @guix/python
guix/build/pyproject-build-system\.scm             @guix/python
guix/build-system/pyproject\.scm                   @guix/python
guix/build/python-build-system\.scm                @guix/python
guix/build-system/python\.scm                      @guix/python
guix/import/pypi\.scm                              @guix/python
guix/scripts/import/pypi\.scm                      @guix/python
tests/import/pypi\.scm                             @guix/python

gnu/packages/qt\.scm                               @guix/qt
guix/build-system/qt\.scm                          @guix/qt
guix/build/qt-build-system\.scm                    @guix/qt
guix/build/qt-utils\.scm                           @guix/qt

gnu/packages/bioconductor\.scm                     @guix/r
gnu/packages/cran\.scm                             @guix/r
guix/build/r-build-system\.scm                     @guix/r
guix/build-system/r\.scm                           @guix/r
guix/import/cran\.scm                              @guix/r
guix/scripts/import/cran\.scm                      @guix/r
tests/import/cran\.scm                             @guix/r

gnu/packages/chez\.scm                             @guix/racket
gnu/packages/racket\.scm                           @guix/racket

NEWS                                               @guix/release
etc/manifests/release\.scm                         @guix/release

gnu/packages/diffoscope\.scm                       @guix/reproduciblebuilds

gnu/packages/ruby\.scm                             @guix/ruby
guix/build/ruby-build-system\.scm                  @guix/ruby
guix/build-system/ruby\.scm                        @guix/ruby
guix/import/gem\.scm                               @guix/ruby
guix/scripts/import/gem\.scm                       @guix/ruby
tests/import/gem\.scm                              @guix/ruby

gnu/packages/(crates|rust)(-.+|)\.scm$             @guix/rust
gnu/packages/sequoia\.scm                          @guix/rust
guix/build/cargo-build-system\.scm                 @guix/rust
guix/build/cargo-utils\.scm                        @guix/rust
guix/build-system/cargo\.scm                       @guix/rust
guix/import/crate\.scm                             @guix/rust
guix/import/crate/cargo-lock\.scm                  @guix/rust
guix/scripts/import/crate\.scm                     @guix/rust
tests/import/crate\.scm                            @guix/rust

gnu/packages/fortran(-.+|)\.scm$                   @guix/science
gnu/packages/algebra\.scm                          @guix/science
gnu/packages/astronomy\.scm                        @guix/science
gnu/packages/chemistry\.scm                        @guix/science
gnu/packages/geo\.scm                              @guix/science
gnu/packages/graph\.scm                            @guix/science
gnu/packages/lean\.scm                             @guix/science
gnu/packages/maths\.scm                            @guix/science
gnu/packages/medical\.scm                          @guix/science
gnu/packages/sagemath\.scm                         @guix/science
gnu/packages/statistics\.scm                       @guix/science

gnu/packages/sugar\.scm                            @guix/sugar

gnu/packages/admin\.scm                            @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/acl\.scm                              @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/adns\.scm                             @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/antivirus\.scm                        @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/apparmor\.scm                         @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/authentication\.scm                   @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/cluster\.scm                          @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/configuration-management              @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/databases\.scm                        @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/distributed\.scm                      @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/dns\.scm                              @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/high-availability\.scm                @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/kerberos\.scm                         @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/logging\.scm                          @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/monitoring\.scm                       @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/nfs\.scm                              @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/openldap\.scm                         @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/openstack\.scm                        @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/prometheus\.scm                       @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/rdesktop\.scm                         @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/samba\.scm                            @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/selinux\.scm                          @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/storage\.scm                          @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/task-runners\.scm                     @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/terraform\.scm                        @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/virtualization\.scm                   @guix/sysadmin
gnu/packages/vnc\.scm                              @guix/sysadmin

gnu/build/jami-service\.scm                        @guix/telephony
gnu/packages/jami\.scm                             @guix/telephony
gnu/packages/linphone\.scm                         @guix/telephony
gnu/packages/telephony\.scm                        @guix/telephony
gnu/services/telephony\.scm                        @guix/telephony
gnu/tests/data/jami-dummy-account\.dat             @guix/telephony
gnu/tests/telephony\.scm                           @guix/telephony
tests/services/telephony\.scm                      @guix/telephony

gnu/packages/tex\.scm                              @guix/tex
gnu/packages/texlive\.scm                          @guix/tex
guix/build/texlive-build-system\.scm               @guix/tex
guix/build-system/texlive\.scm                     @guix/tex
guix/import/texlive\.scm                           @guix/tex
guix/scripts/import/texlive\.scm                   @guix/tex
tests/import/texlive\.scm                          @guix/tex

etc/news\.scm                                      @guix/translations
po/                                                @guix/translations

gnu/packages/xfce\.scm                             @guix/xfce

gnu/packages/zig\.scm                              @guix/zig
gnu/packages/zig-xyz\.scm                          @guix/zig
guix/build/zig-build-system\.scm                   @guix/zig
guix/build-system/zig\.scm                         @guix/zig

